README.md, before:

# http-errors-enhanced

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/http-errors-enhanced.svg)](https://npm.im/http-errors-enhanced)
[![Dependencies](https://img.shields.io/librariesio/release/npm/http-errors-enhanced)](https://libraries.io/npm/http-errors-enhanced)
[![Build](https://github.com/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced/actions?query=workflow%3ACI)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced?token=jxElZm8DEK)](https://codecov.io/gh/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced)

Create HTTP errors with additional properties for any framework.

http://sw.cowtech.it/http-errors-enhanced

## Installation

Just run:

```bash
npm install http-errors-enhanced --save
```

## Usage

You can create an error by using the generic base class.

```javascript
import { HttpError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = new HttpError(404, 'Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = new HttpError(404, { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
const error3 = new HttpError('NotFound', 'Page not found.')
const error4 = new HttpError('NotFound', { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

Or you can import a specific error class and instantiate that, to have some status and messages set up for you automatically.

```javascript
import { NotFoundError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = new NotFoundError('Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = new NotFoundError({ key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

Or, if you don't want to use the `new` operator, you can use the `createError` function:

```javascript
import { createError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = createError(404, 'Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = createError(404, { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
const error3 = createError('NotFound', 'Page not found.')
const error4 = createError('NotFound', { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

## API

### HttpError

The main error class.

The constructor signature is the following:

```javascript
constructor(status, message, properties)
```

Where:

- `status`: A HTTP status code as number or a identifier (like: `NotFound`). If the identifier is not valid or the number outside the validity range (`400 <= status <= 599`), it defaults to 500.
- `message`: The error message. This is optional.
- `properties`: A list of additional properties to attach to the error. With the exception of `code`, `message`, `stack`, `expose` and `headers`, all properties that already exist in the object are ignored. This is optional.

The returned instance is a descendant class of `Error` with the following base properties, plus all the other properties specified in the constructor:

- `status`: The HTTP status as number.
- `statusCode`: It always mirrors `status`. It exists for compatibility reasons.
- `statusClass`: The HTTP status class, which is its first digit multiplied by 100. For instance, the status class of `404` is `400`.
- `code`: A string identifier for the error. If not ovewritten using properties, it always starts with `HTTP_ERROR_` (this prefix is also exported as `HttpError.standardErrorPrefix`). If the status code is know, it will be a string representation of it, like `HTTP_ERROR_NOT_FOUND`, otherwise it will contain the status number, like `HTTP_ERROR_570`.
- `error`: The HTTP status code description, if found. Example: `Not Found`.
- `errorPhrase`: The HTTP status code as phrase, if found. Example: `Not found.`.
- `expose`: A boolean to notify frameworks if errors internals (like message and stack) should be sent to client. Unless overwritten, it is set to `true` for errors whose statusClass is 400.
- `headers`: An object of HTTP headers to send to the client.
- `isClientError`: This is set to `true` if the HTTP status class is 400.
- `isServerError`: This is set to `true` if the HTTP status class is 500.

Each instance has a `serialize(extended, omitStack)` function.

If called without argument, it will return a object with the properties `statusCode`, `error` and `message` copied from the instance.

If called with `extended` set to `true`, it will call `serializeError` (see below) on the instance.

### Named error classes

For each known HTTP error, taken from Node.js [http.STATUS_CODES](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_http_status_codes), there is an exported named class.

For instance, for the HTTP error 404, there is the `NotFoundError` which inherits from `HttpError`.

The constructor of a named class is the following:

```javascript
constructor([message], [properties])
```

### createError(status, [message], [properties])

The function can be used to create an `HttpError` without using the `new` operator.

It accepts the same arguments of the `HttpError` constructor.

### isHttpError(val)

The function can be used to check if an value is a `HttpError` or it has compatible properties. It follows the same semantic of the hononym function of [http-errors](https://github.com/jshttp/http-errors).

The function returns `true` if the value is an instance of `HttpError` or if the value is an object with a `status` property which is a number (and it is mirrored by the `statusCode` property) and a `expose` property which is a boolean.

### addAdditionalProperties(target, source)

Copies all enumerable properties from `source` to `target`, skipping the ones which are already defined.

### serializeError(val, [omitStack])

The function extracts the `message`, `code` (or `name` if no code is present) and `stack` properties from an object (typically a descendant of `Error`).

The extract properties are formatted and returned in a plain object containing `message` (string) and `stack` (array of strings) properties.

The object also contains all the other properties of the original object.

If `omitStack` is `true`, the `stack` property is omitted.

### Constants

The package exports several utility constants to make HTTP status handling easier

#### identifierByCodes and codesByIdentifier

A map of statuses identifiers indexed by HTTP status code and its reverse. This also exports HTTP classes 100, 200 and 300.

```javascript
console.log(identifierByCodes[404])
// => NotFound

console.log(codesByIdentifier['NotFound'])
// => 404
```

#### messagesByCodes and phrasesByCodes

A map of statuses descriptions and phrases indexed by HTTP status code. This also exports HTTP classes 100, 200 and 300.

```javascript
console.log(messagesByCodes[404])
// => Not Found

console.log(phrasesByCodes[404])
// => Not found.
```

#### Named status constants

For each HTTP status there is a upper snake case constant exported.

```javascript
console.log(CREATED)
// => 201

console.log(NOT_FOUND)
// => 404
```

### JSON Schemas definitions

The package defines a schema for commonly used error codes, in order to easily include them in [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) and [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/) based validation frameworks.

```javascript
console.log(JSON.stringify(notFoundErrorSchema))
/*
=> {
  "type": "object",
  "$id": "errors/404",
  "description": "Error returned when the requested resource is not found.",
  "properties": {
    "statusCode": {
      "type": "number",
      "description": "The error code",
      "enum": [
        404
      ],
      "example": 404
    },
    "error": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The error title",
      "enum": [
        "NotFound"
      ],
      "example": "NotFound"
    },
    "message": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The error message",
      "pattern": ".+",
      "example": "NotFound."
    }
  },
  "required": [
    "statusCode",
    "error",
    "message"
  ],
  additionalProperties: false
}
*/
```

## ESM Only

This package only supports to be directly imported in a ESM context.

For informations on how to use it in a CommonJS context, please check [this page](https://gist.github.com/ShogunPanda/fe98fd23d77cdfb918010dbc42f4504d).

## Credits

This project has been heavily inspired by [http-errors](https://github.com/jshttp/http-errors), of which is a indipendent and unrelated project.

## Contributing to http-errors-enhanced

- Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet.
- Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it.
- Fork the project.
- Start a feature/bugfix branch.
- Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution.
- Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2020 and above Shogun (shogun@cowtech.it).

Licensed under the ISC license, which can be found at https://choosealicense.com/licenses/isc.

Commit message:

feat: Add default message if none provided

README.md, after:

# http-errors-enhanced

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/http-errors-enhanced.svg)](https://npm.im/http-errors-enhanced)
[![Dependencies](https://img.shields.io/librariesio/release/npm/http-errors-enhanced)](https://libraries.io/npm/http-errors-enhanced)
[![Build](https://github.com/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced/actions?query=workflow%3ACI)
[![Coverage](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/gh/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced?token=jxElZm8DEK)](https://codecov.io/gh/ShogunPanda/http-errors-enhanced)

Create HTTP errors with additional properties for any framework.

http://sw.cowtech.it/http-errors-enhanced

## Installation

Just run:

```bash
npm install http-errors-enhanced --save
```

## Usage

You can create an error by using the generic base class.

```javascript
import { HttpError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = new HttpError(404, 'Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = new HttpError(404, { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
const error3 = new HttpError('NotFound', 'Page not found.')
const error4 = new HttpError('NotFound', { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

Or you can import a specific error class and instantiate that, to have some status and messages set up for you automatically.

```javascript
import { NotFoundError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = new NotFoundError('Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = new NotFoundError({ key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

Or, if you don't want to use the `new` operator, you can use the `createError` function:

```javascript
import { createError } from 'http-errors-enhanced'

// Any of the following will return the same error
const error1 = createError(404, 'Page not found.', { key1: 'prop1' })
const error2 = createError(404, { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
const error3 = createError('NotFound', 'Page not found.')
const error4 = createError('NotFound', { key1: 'prop1', message: 'Page not found.' })
```

## API

### HttpError

The main error class.

The constructor signature is the following:

```javascript
constructor(status, message, properties)
```

Where:

- `status`: A HTTP status code as number or a identifier (like: `NotFound`). If the identifier is not valid or the number outside the validity range (`400 <= status <= 599`), it defaults to 500.
- `message`: The error message. This is optional. If not provided, the default HTTP status code description will be used.
- `properties`: A list of additional properties to attach to the error. With the exception of `code`, `message`, `stack`, `expose` and `headers`, all properties that already exist in the object are ignored. This is optional.

The returned instance is a descendant class of `Error` with the following base properties, plus all the other properties specified in the constructor:

- `status`: The HTTP status as number.
- `statusCode`: It always mirrors `status`. It exists for compatibility reasons.
- `statusClass`: The HTTP status class, which is its first digit multiplied by 100. For instance, the status class of `404` is `400`.
- `code`: A string identifier for the error. If not ovewritten using properties, it always starts with `HTTP_ERROR_` (this prefix is also exported as `HttpError.standardErrorPrefix`). If the status code is know, it will be a string representation of it, like `HTTP_ERROR_NOT_FOUND`, otherwise it will contain the status number, like `HTTP_ERROR_570`.
- `error`: The HTTP status code description, if found. Example: `Not Found`.
- `errorPhrase`: The HTTP status code as phrase, if found. Example: `Not found.`.
- `expose`: A boolean to notify frameworks if errors internals (like message and stack) should be sent to client. Unless overwritten, it is set to `true` for errors whose statusClass is 400.
- `headers`: An object of HTTP headers to send to the client.
- `isClientError`: This is set to `true` if the HTTP status class is 400.
- `isServerError`: This is set to `true` if the HTTP status class is 500.

Each instance has a `serialize(extended, omitStack)` function.

If called without argument, it will return a object with the properties `statusCode`, `error` and `message` copied from the instance.

If called with `extended` set to `true`, it will call `serializeError` (see below) on the instance.

### Named error classes

For each known HTTP error, taken from Node.js [http.STATUS_CODES](https://nodejs.org/api/http.html#http_http_status_codes), there is an exported named class.

For instance, for the HTTP error 404, there is the `NotFoundError` which inherits from `HttpError`.

The constructor of a named class is the following:

```javascript
constructor([message], [properties])
```

### createError(status, [message], [properties])

The function can be used to create an `HttpError` without using the `new` operator.

It accepts the same arguments of the `HttpError` constructor.

### isHttpError(val)

The function can be used to check if an value is a `HttpError` or it has compatible properties. It follows the same semantic of the hononym function of [http-errors](https://github.com/jshttp/http-errors).

The function returns `true` if the value is an instance of `HttpError` or if the value is an object with a `status` property which is a number (and it is mirrored by the `statusCode` property) and a `expose` property which is a boolean.

### addAdditionalProperties(target, source)

Copies all enumerable properties from `source` to `target`, skipping the ones which are already defined.

### serializeError(val, [omitStack])

The function extracts the `message`, `code` (or `name` if no code is present) and `stack` properties from an object (typically a descendant of `Error`).

The extract properties are formatted and returned in a plain object containing `message` (string) and `stack` (array of strings) properties.

The object also contains all the other properties of the original object.

If `omitStack` is `true`, the `stack` property is omitted.

### Constants

The package exports several utility constants to make HTTP status handling easier

#### identifierByCodes and codesByIdentifier

A map of statuses identifiers indexed by HTTP status code and its reverse. This also exports HTTP classes 100, 200 and 300.

```javascript
console.log(identifierByCodes[404])
// => NotFound

console.log(codesByIdentifier['NotFound'])
// => 404
```

#### messagesByCodes and phrasesByCodes

A map of statuses descriptions and phrases indexed by HTTP status code. This also exports HTTP classes 100, 200 and 300.

```javascript
console.log(messagesByCodes[404])
// => Not Found

console.log(phrasesByCodes[404])
// => Not found.
```

#### Named status constants

For each HTTP status there is a upper snake case constant exported.

```javascript
console.log(CREATED)
// => 201

console.log(NOT_FOUND)
// => 404
```

### JSON Schemas definitions

The package defines a schema for commonly used error codes, in order to easily include them in [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) and [OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org/) based validation frameworks.

```javascript
console.log(JSON.stringify(notFoundErrorSchema))
/*
=> {
  "type": "object",
  "$id": "errors/404",
  "description": "Error returned when the requested resource is not found.",
  "properties": {
    "statusCode": {
      "type": "number",
      "description": "The error code",
      "enum": [
        404
      ],
      "example": 404
    },
    "error": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The error title",
      "enum": [
        "NotFound"
      ],
      "example": "NotFound"
    },
    "message": {
      "type": "string",
      "description": "The error message",
      "pattern": ".+",
      "example": "NotFound."
    }
  },
  "required": [
    "statusCode",
    "error",
    "message"
  ],
  additionalProperties: false
}
*/
```

## ESM Only

This package only supports to be directly imported in a ESM context.

For informations on how to use it in a CommonJS context, please check [this page](https://gist.github.com/ShogunPanda/fe98fd23d77cdfb918010dbc42f4504d).

## Credits

This project has been heavily inspired by [http-errors](https://github.com/jshttp/http-errors), of which is a indipendent and unrelated project.

## Contributing to http-errors-enhanced

- Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet.
- Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it.
- Fork the project.
- Start a feature/bugfix branch.
- Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution.
- Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.

## Copyright

Copyright (C) 2020 and above Shogun (shogun@cowtech.it).

Licensed under the ISC license, which can be found at https://choosealicense.com/licenses/isc.
